A content management system (CMS) is computer software used to manage the creation and modification of digital content (content management).
A CMS is typically used for enterprise content management (ECM) and web content management (WCM).
ECM typically supports multiple users in a collaborative environment by integrating document management, digital asset management, and record retention. 
Alternatively, WCM is the collaborative authoring for websites and may include text and embed graphics, photos, video, audio, maps, and program code that display content and interact with the user. ECM typically includes a WCM function.

Structure
A CMS typically has two major components: a content management application (CMA), as the front-end user interface that allows a user, even with limited expertise, to add, modify, and remove content from a website without the intervention of a webmaster; and a content delivery application (CDA), that compiles the content and updates the website.

Installation type
There are two types of CMS installation: on-premises and cloud-based. On-premises installation means that the CMS software can be installed on the server. This approach is usually taken by businesses that want flexibility in their setup. Notable CMSs which can be installed on-premises are Wordpress.org, Drupal, Joomla, Grav, ModX and others. 
The cloud-based CMS is hosted on the vendor environment. Examples of notable cloud-based CMSs are SquareSpace, Contentful, Wordpress.com, Webflow, Ghost and WIX.

Common features
The core CMS features are: indexing, search and retrieval, format management, revision control, and management.
Features may vary depending on the system application but will typically include:

Intuitive indexing, search, and retrieval features index all data for easy access through search functions and allow users to search by attributes such as publication dates, keywords or author.
Format management facilitates turning scanned paper documents and legacy electronic documents into HTML or PDF documents.
Revision features allow content to be updated and edited after initial publication. Revision control also tracks any changes made to files by individuals.
Publishing functionality allows individuals to use a template or a set of templates approved by the organization, as well as wizards and other tools to create or modify content.
Popular additional features may include:

 SEO-friendly URLs
Integrated and online help, including  discussion boards
Group-based permission systems
Full template support and customizable templates
Easy wizard-based install and versioning procedures
Admin panel with multiple language support
Content hierarchy with unlimited depth and size
Minimal server requirements
Integrated file managers
Integrated audit logs
Support AMP page for Google
Support schema markup
Designed as per Google quality guidelines for website architecture
Availability of plug-ins for additional functionalities.
Security precautions such as 2 Factor Authentication

Other types of content management systems
Digital asset management systems are another type of CMS. They manage content with clearly-defined author or ownership, such as documents, movies, pictures, phone numbers, and scientific data. Companies also use CMSs to store, control, revise, and publish documentation.
There are also component content management systems (CCMS), which are CMSs that manage content at a modular level rather than as pages or articles. CCMSs are often used in technical communication, where many publications reuse the same content.

Widely used CMSs
Based on a survey, the most widely used content management system is WordPress, used by 42.8% of the top 10 million websites as of October 2021. Other commonly used content management systems include Joomla, Shopify, and Wix.

See also
References
Bibliography
Andreas Mauthe; Peter Thomas (2004). Professional Content Management Systems: Handling Digital Media Assets. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-85542-3.
Chock, M.; Cardenas, A. F.; Klinger, A. (July 1984). "Database Structure and Manipulation Capabilities of a Picture Database Management System (PICDMS)". IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. PAMI-6 (4): 484–492. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.1984.4767553. PMID 21869216. S2CID 17289079.

External links

Content Management Systems at Curlie